.TH INTERCAL 1 "2026" "intercal" "INTERCAL Compiler Manual"
.SH NAME
intercal \- self-hosting compiler for the INTERCAL programming language
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B intercal
.I source.i
.RB [ \-o
.IR output ]
.PP
.B intercalc.sh
.B <
.I source.i
.B >
.I output
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B intercal
compiles INTERCAL source code directly to a native executable, with no C or other intermediate language. The toolchain provides two compilers:
.PP
.B intercal
is the self-hosted wrapper. It invokes
.B intercal_core
(compiled from
.B src/compiler/compiler.i
by the bootstrap), which emits program assembly. The wrapper concatenates the platform runtime, system library, and program assembly and assembles the final binary with
.BR cc .
.PP
.B intercalc.sh
is the bootstrap compiler, a zsh script that parses INTERCAL directly and emits assembly. It is the source-of-truth compiler; the self-hosted compiler must match its output.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-o \fIoutput\fR
Write the compiled binary to
.IR output .
Default:
.BR a.out .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B INTERCAL_PLATFORM
Override platform auto-detection. One of
.BR macos_arm64 ,
.BR linux_arm64 ,
.BR linux_x86_64 .
Useful for cross-emitting assembly with
.B INTERCAL_ASM_ONLY=1
(bootstrap only).
.TP
.B INTERCAL_ASM_ONLY
If set to
.BR 1 ,
the bootstrap emits only the program assembly (does not invoke
.BR cc ).
Used by release tooling to pre-generate templates.
.TP
.B INTERCAL_CC
Override the
.B cc
command used for assembly. Default:
.BR cc .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Compilation and execution succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
A fatal error occurred; an
.B ICLnnnI
code is written to stderr. See the
.B ERROR CODES
section.
.SH ERROR CODES
INTERCAL errors follow the convention
.BR ICLnnnI " <description>"
printed to stderr. Compile-time errors are emitted by the compiler; runtime errors are emitted by the compiled program's runtime.
.PP
Compile-time:
.TP
.B ICL079I
PROGRAMMER IS INSUFFICIENTLY POLITE \- fewer than 1/5 of statements use PLEASE.
.TP
.B ICL099I
PROGRAMMER IS OVERLY POLITE \- more than 1/3 of statements use PLEASE.
.TP
.B ICL182I
DUPLICATE LINE LABEL DETECTED.
.TP
.B ICL197I
LABEL VALUE OUTSIDE PERMITTED RANGE (1-65535).
.PP
Runtime:
.TP
.B ICL123I
PROGRAM HAS DISAPPEARED INTO THE BLACK LAGOON \- NEXT stack overflow.
.TP
.B ICL275I
32-bit value assigned to 16-bit variable.
.TP
.B ICL436I
RETRIEVE without prior STASH.
.TP
.B ICL621I
ERROR TYPE NOT FOUND IN ANY KNOWN LANGUAGE \- RESUME with count zero.
.TP
.B ICL632I
The program terminated via RESUME instead of GIVE UP.
.TP
.B ICL633I
PROGRAM FELL OFF THE EDGE \- execution reached end without GIVE UP.
.PP
The full list is documented in
.BR AGENTS.md .
.SH FILES
.TP
.BR /usr/lib/intercal/
Installed package location. Contains
.BR intercal_core ,
.BR intercal ,
.BR src/ ,
.BR tools/ ,
.BR tests/ .
.TP
.BR /usr/bin/intercal
Symlink into the installed package.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Compile and run a program:
.PP
.nf
.RS
echo 'DO GIVE UP' > p.i
intercal p.i -o p
./p
.RE
.fi
.PP
Compile with the bootstrap directly:
.PP
.nf
.RS
zsh /usr/lib/intercal/src/bootstrap/intercalc.sh < p.i > p
chmod +x p
./p
.RE
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cc (1),
.BR ld (1)
.PP
Project repository and documentation:
.B https://github.com/jhg/intercal
.PP
Original INTERCAL-72 manual by Woods and Lyon (1973). C-INTERCAL and CLC-INTERCAL are separate implementations; this compiler is a clean-room implementation.
.SH AUTHORS
The
.B intercal
compiler is developed at https://github.com/jhg/intercal and released into the public domain.
